.\" Manpage for awkrs.
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/awkrs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH AWKRS 1 "2026-05-14" "awkrs 0.4.10" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
awkrs \- pattern-directed scanning and processing language (Rust awk with parallel records and Cranelift JIT)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B awkrs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-f\fR \fIprogfile\fR | \fB\-e\fR \fIprogram\fR | \fIprogram\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR] [\fIfile\fR ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B awkrs
runs
.B pattern \[->] action
programs over input records like POSIX
.BR awk ,
GNU
.BR gawk ,
and
.BR mawk .
The CLI accepts the union of POSIX, gawk, and mawk
.RB ( \-W )
options. The execution engine is a Cranelift\-JIT bytecode VM with a parallel record
processor that activates automatically when the program is parallel\-safe and
.B \-j
selects more than one thread; otherwise execution is sequential.
.PP
The program text is taken from the first non\-option argument unless
.B \-f
or
.B \-e
is given. Remaining non\-option arguments are input files; if none are given,
standard input is read.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS POSIX
.TP
.BR \-f " \fIPROGFILE\fR, " \-\-file =\fIPROGFILE\fR
Read program source from
.IR PROGFILE .
May be repeated; sources are concatenated.
.TP
.BR \-F " \fIFS\fR, " \-\-field\-separator =\fIFS\fR
Set the input field separator
.RB ( FS ).
.TP
.BR \-v " \fIvar=val\fR, " \-\-assign =\fIvar=val\fR
Assign
.I val
to
.I var
before
.B BEGIN
runs. Repeatable.
.SS GNU program sources
.TP
.BR \-e " \fIPROGRAM\fR, " \-\-source =\fIPROGRAM\fR
Inline program text. Repeatable; sources are concatenated.
.TP
.BR \-i " \fIFILE\fR, " \-\-include =\fIFILE\fR
Include awk source file (gawk
.BR @include
behavior). Repeatable.
.SS gawk extensions
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-characters\-as\-bytes
Use byte length for
.BR length ,
.BR substr ,
.BR index .
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-traditional
Traditional POSIX awk mode (stored on the runtime; minimal effect today).
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-copyright
Print copyright information.
.TP
.BR \-d "[\fIFILE\fR], " \-\-dump\-variables [=\fIFILE\fR]
Dump globals after the program runs. Argument is a path,
.BR \- ,
or empty for stdout.
.TP
.BR \-D "[\fIFILE\fR], " \-\-debug [=\fIFILE\fR]
Static rule/function listing to
.I FILE
or stderr. Not gawk's interactive debugger.
.TP
.BR \-E " \fIFILE\fR, " \-\-exec =\fIFILE\fR
Execute program from
.I FILE
then exit (gawk
.BR \-E ).
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-gen\-pot
Generate gettext
.B .pot
output and exit before execution.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-trace
Trace execution.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-csv
CSV mode. Sets
.B FS
to comma and
.B FPAT
to handle quoted fields with
.B ""
escapes.
.TP
.BR \-l " \fILIB\fR, " \-\-load =\fILIB\fR
Load
.IB LIB .awk
from
.B AWKPATH
(default
.BR . ).
Bundled gawk extension names
.RB ( filefuncs ", " readdir ", " time ", "
\&...) are accepted as no\-ops; arbitrary
.B .so
modules error at parse time.
.TP
.BR \-L " \fILEVEL\fR, " \-\-lint =\fILEVEL\fR
Lint level:
.BR fatal ", " invalid ", " no\-ext .
When the runtime variable
.B LINT
is truthy, additionally emits
.B awkrs: warning:
diagnostics on stderr for
.B sqrt
and
.B log
domain issues.
.TP
.BR \-M ", " \-\-bignum
Arbitrary\-precision arithmetic via MPFR
.RB ( rug ,
default 256 bits;
.BR PROCINFO["prec"] / PROCINFO["roundmode"]
apply). Disables the JIT.
.TP
.BR \-N ", " \-\-use\-lc\-numeric
Apply
.B LC_NUMERIC
to
.BR sprintf / printf / print
and
.BR %' \ grouping.
String\-to\-number parsing for
.BR $n / $0
still uses
.BR . .
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-non\-decimal\-data
Allow non\-decimal input data
.RB ( strtonum \-style
hex/octal coercion).
.TP
.BR \-o "[\fIFILE\fR], " \-\-pretty\-print [=\fIFILE\fR]
Awkrs AST listing. Not gawk's canonical reformatter.
.TP
.BR \-O ", " \-\-optimize
Accepted for parity. The Cranelift JIT is on by default; use
.B \-s
to disable.
.TP
.BR \-p "[\fIFILE\fR], " \-\-profile [=\fIFILE\fR]
Wall\-clock summary plus per\-record\-rule hit counts
.RB ( "\-j 1"
only). Not gawk's per\-line profiler.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-posix
Strict POSIX mode (stored on the runtime; minimal effect today).
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-re\-interval
Accepted as a no\-op;
.B {m,n}
interval syntax is always enabled.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-no\-optimize
Disable the Cranelift JIT.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-sandbox
Block
.BR system() ,
file redirects, pipes, coprocesses, and inet I/O.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-lint\-old
Lint old\-style awk constructs.
.SS mawk / BusyBox
.TP
.BI \-W \ OPT
mawk\-style option(s), comma\-separated.
.B help
and
.B usage
print help and exit;
.B version
or
.B v
print the version;
.B dump
triggers a dump action.
.BI exec= FILE
sets the exec file. Other tokens
.RB ( posix_space ", " interactive ", " random ", "
.BI sprintf= N\fR)
are accepted silently for compatibility.
.SS awkrs\-specific
.TP
.BR \-j " \fIN\fR, " \-\-threads =\fIN\fR
Worker threads for the parallel record engine. Default
.BR 1 .
The engine downgrades to sequential automatically when the program is not parallel\-safe.
.TP
.BI \-\-read\-ahead\fR= N
Lines per batch read from stdin in
.B \-j
parallel mode without input files. Each batch is processed in parallel and
printed in order before the next batch is read. Default
.BR 1024 .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print the cyberpunk HUD help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH PROGRAM TEXT
Program text follows POSIX awk and the gawk extensions documented in the project
README. Highlights:
.IP \[bu] 2
Rules:
.BR BEGIN ", " END ", " BEGINFILE ", " ENDFILE ,
empty pattern,
.BR /regex/ ,
expression patterns, range patterns
.RB ( /a/,/b/ " or " "NR==1,NR==5" ).
The four special patterns must use
.BR { \ ... \ } ;
record rules may omit braces for the default
.BR "{ print $0 }" .
.IP \[bu] 2
Statements:
.BR if ", " while ", " do\-while ", " for
(C\-style and
.BR "for (i in arr)" ),
.BR switch / case / default
(gawk\-style: no fall\-through, regex
.BR "case /re/" ),
.BR print / printf
with
.BR > ", " >> ", " | ", " |&
redirection,
.BR break ", " continue ", " next ", " nextfile ", " exit ", " delete ", " return ", " getline .
.IP \[bu] 2
.B getline
as expression returns
.B 1
(read),
.B 0
(EOF),
.B \-1
(error),
.B \-2
(gawk retryable I/O when
.BR PROCINFO[input,"RETRY"]
is set).
.IP \[bu] 2
Records and fields:
.B RS
is newline by default; one (UTF\-8) char is a literal delimiter;
.BR RS=""
is paragraph mode; multi\-char is a gawk regex
.RB ( RT
holds the matched text).
.B FIELDWIDTHS
selects fixed\-width when non\-empty.
.B FPAT
selects pattern\-based fields.
.IP \[bu] 2
Namespaces and modules:
.BR @include ", " @load ", " @namespace .
.IP \[bu] 2
Networking:
.BR /inet/tcp/... ", " /inet/udp/...
endpoints for
.BR getline / print
and the coprocess operator
.BR |& .
.IP \[bu] 2
Introspection:
.BR PROCINFO ", " SYMTAB ", " FUNCTAB
populated in gawk\-compatible form
.RB ( PROCINFO["sorted_in"]
supports
.BI @ind_ X ,
.BI @val_ X ,
and 2\- or 4\-arg user comparator functions).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B AWKPATH
Search path for
.B \-l
and
.BR @include .
Default
.BR . .
.TP
.B AWKLIBPATH
Search path for
.BR @load .
.TP
.B GAWK_READ_TIMEOUT
Default read timeout (ms) used as the fallback for
.BR PROCINFO[input,"READ_TIMEOUT"] .
.TP
.B LC_NUMERIC
Locale decimal radix and thousands grouping when
.B \-N
is set; affects
.BR sprintf / printf / print
output only, not
.BR $n / $0
parsing.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B 1
Error during program execution or invalid usage. Errors are written to stderr in the form
.BR "awkrs: \fIcommand\fR: \fIreason\fR" .
.TP
.IR n
The program may exit with any status by calling
.BR exit\ \fIn\fR .
.SH EXAMPLES
Print the second whitespace\-separated field of every line:
.RS
.nf
awkrs '{ print $2 }' input.txt
.fi
.RE
.PP
Sum a CSV column with quoted\-field handling and four worker threads:
.RS
.nf
awkrs \-k \-j 4 'NR>1 { s += $3 } END { print s }' data.csv
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a program from a file, assign a variable, and read multiple inputs:
.RS
.nf
awkrs \-f report.awk \-v threshold=100 a.log b.log
.fi
.RE
.PP
Disable the JIT (pure bytecode VM):
.RS
.nf
awkrs \-s '{ print NR, $0 }' big.txt
.fi
.RE
.PP
Wall\-clock profile to a file (sequential mode required):
.RS
.nf
awkrs \-j 1 \-p prof.out \-f program.awk input.txt
.fi
.RE
.PP
Arbitrary\-precision arithmetic:
.RS
.nf
awkrs \-M 'BEGIN { PREC=200; print 2^200 }'
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I completions/_awkrs
Zsh completion. Add the directory to
.B fpath
and run
.BR "autoload -Uz compinit && compinit" .
.SH PARITY GAPS
.B awkrs
diverges from gawk in the following documented ways:
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR \-D ", " \-o ", " \-p
produce awkrs\-specific output, not gawk's debugger / pretty\-printer / per\-line profiler formats.
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR \-c ", " \-P
are accepted but currently have minimal runtime effect.
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR \-r
is a no\-op; interval regex syntax is always available.
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR \-N
does not affect string\-to\-number parsing for
.BR $n / $0 .
.IP \[bu] 2
.B @load
of arbitrary
.B .so
gawkapi modules is rejected; bundled extension names are accepted as no\-ops because the builtins are native.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B PROCINFO["platform"]
returns gawk values
.RB ( posix ", " mingw ", " vms ),
not Rust target names.
.IP \[bu] 2
.B \-M
disables the Cranelift JIT.
.IP \[bu] 2
JIT
.B getline
failures abort the JIT chunk instead of returning
.BR \-1 / \-2 ;
the VM path is fully gawk\-compatible.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR awk (1),
.BR gawk (1),
.BR mawk (1)
.PP
Project README, compatibility matrix, and benchmarks:
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/awkrs
github.com/MenkeTechnologies/awkrs
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
Jacob Menke (MenkeTechnologies) <linux.dev25@gmail.com>.
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/awkrs/issues
github.com/MenkeTechnologies/awkrs/issues
.UE .
